.TH TRANSLATE 1 "April 2026" "translate 0.1.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
translate \- fast on-device translation using Apple's Translation framework
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B translate
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ text ...]
.br
.B translate --serve
.RI [ --port " port" ]
.RI [ --host " host" ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B translate
is a UNIX-style macOS command-line filter for on-device translation. It
reads text from positional arguments, files, or standard input; writes
translated text to standard output; and writes errors and optional progress
to standard error.
.PP
The source language is detected once with NaturalLanguage when
.B --from
is omitted. Translation uses Apple's on-device Translation framework. No
cloud translation service, API key, telemetry, or third-party translation
library is used by this program.
.PP
With
.BR --serve ,
.B translate
exposes an HTTP server compatible with three real-world translation APIs:
DeepL v2, LibreTranslate, and Google Cloud Translation v2. Existing client
libraries (Python
.BR deepl ,
Node
.BR deepl-node ,
.BR libretranslatepy ,
.BR google-cloud-translate )
can target this server by overriding their endpoint URL.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --to " lang"
Target language as a BCP-47 identifier (e.g.
.BR en ,
.BR de ,
.BR ja ,
.BR de-AT ).
.TP
.BI --from " lang"
Source language. If omitted, detected from the input prefix.
.TP
.B --detect-only
Print detected language code and confidence, then exit without translating.
.TP
.BI --format " mode"
Output format:
.BR plain ,
.BR json ,
or
.BR ndjson .
The default is
.BR plain .
.TP
.B --preserve-newlines
Preserve newline structure (default).
.TP
.B --no-preserve-newlines
Allow paragraph-level newline reflow.
.TP
.B --batch
Treat each input line as an independent translation unit.
.TP
.BI --file " path"
Translate a UTF-8 file. Repeatable.
.TP
.BI --install " pair"
Prepare/download a model pair such as
.BR de-en .
.TP
.B --installed
List installed language pairs and exit.
.TP
.B --available
List supported language pairs and exit.
.TP
.B --no-install
Fail with exit 4 if a required model is missing.
.TP
.BI --langs " a,b,c"
Comma-separated detection hints for short or ambiguous input.
.TP
.B --quiet
Suppress progress messages on standard error.
.TP
.B --serve
Run as an HTTP server.
.TP
.BI --port " port"
TCP port for
.BR --serve .
Default
.BR 8989 .
.TP
.BI --host " host"
Bind address for
.BR --serve .
Default
.BR 127.0.0.1 .
.TP
.BI --api-key " key"
Optional API key required by clients.
.TP
.B --version
Print version information.
.TP
.B --help
Show help.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Pipe German to English:
.EX
echo "hallo welt" | translate --to en
.EE
.TP
Multiple text arguments:
.EX
translate --to de "hello world" "good night"
.EE
.TP
Translate clipboard contents:
.EX
pbpaste | translate --to en | pbcopy
.EE
.TP
Translate a file as NDJSON:
.EX
translate --to ja --format ndjson < sentences.txt | jq -r .dst
.EE
.TP
Install a model pair:
.EX
translate --install de-en
.EE
.TP
Run an HTTP server:
.EX
translate --serve --port 8989
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:8989/v2/translate \\
    --data-urlencode "text=Hallo" --data-urlencode "target_lang=EN"
.EE
.SH HTTP ENDPOINTS
.TP
.B /v2/translate
DeepL-compatible. Form-encoded or JSON.
.TP
.B /v2/languages
DeepL-compatible language list.
.TP
.B /v2/usage
DeepL-compatible quota stub (always returns sentinel values).
.TP
.B /translate
LibreTranslate-compatible. JSON or form. Single string or array
.IR q .
.TP
.B /detect
LibreTranslate-compatible language detection.
.TP
.B /languages
LibreTranslate-compatible language list with
.B targets
field.
.TP
.B /language/translate/v2
Google Cloud Translation v2-compatible. Form or JSON.
.TP
.B /language/translate/v2/languages
Google v2-compatible language list.
.TP
.B /health \fRand\fB /healthz
Service liveness checks.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Input or usage error.
.TP
.B 2
Translation failure.
.TP
.B 3
Unsupported OS.
.TP
.B 4
Model not installed and
.B --no-install
was set.
.TP
.B 5
Unsupported language pair.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pbpaste (1),
.BR pbcopy (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR curl (1)
